

Romans 2:1-16 New International Version

1 You, therefore, have no excuse, you who pass judgment on someone else, for at whatever point you judge another, 
  you are condemning yourself, because you who pass judgment do the same things.

2 Now we know that God’s judgment against those who do such things is based on truth.
 
3 So when you, a mere human being, pass judgment on them and yet do the same things, 
  do you think you will escape God’s judgment?
  
4 Or do you show contempt for the riches of his kindness, forbearance and patience, 
  not realizing that God’s kindness is intended to lead you to repentance?
  
5 But because of your stubbornness and your unrepentant heart, 
you are storing up wrath against yourself for the day of God’s wrath, when his righteous judgment will be revealed. 

6 God “will repay each person according to what they have done.” 

7 To those who by persistence in doing good seek glory, honor and immortality, he will give eternal life. 

8 But for those who are self-seeking and who reject the truth and follow evil, there will be wrath and anger.

9 There will be trouble and distress for every human being who does evil: first for the Jew, then for the Gentile; 

10 but glory, honor and peace for everyone who does good: first for the Jew, then for the Gentile. 

11 For God does not show favoritism.

12 All who sin apart from the law will also perish apart from the law, 
and all who sin under the law will be judged by the law. 

13 For it is not those who hear the law who are righteous in God’s sight, 
but it is those who obey the law who will be declared righteous. 

14 (Indeed, when Gentiles, who do not have the law, do by nature things required by the law, 
they are a law for themselves, even though they do not have the law.

15 They show that the requirements of the law are written on their hearts, 
their consciences also bearing witness, and their thoughts sometimes accusing them and at other times even defending them.)

16 This will take place on the day when God judges people’s secrets through Jesus Christ, as my gospel declares.
